---
layout: post
title:  "Jupyter Tricks"
date:   2015-10-04 17:43:59
author: Tara Furstenau
categories: Programming
tags: Jupyter iPython
cover:  "assets/instacode.png"

---

Jupyter Notebook, previously known as iPython Notebook, is a web based application for interactive computing. Kernels have been developed for many popular programming languages including Julia, Python and R which have been clevarly combined to form the new name Jupyter.  These notebooks are a great way to record any data analysis work flow and are therefore great for reproducibility.  Notebooks also allow you to keep all of your code in one place instead of having a directory full of random scripts and output.  The integration of Markdown cells makes documentation clean and simple so notebooks are a great way to share results with colleagues.  In this post I will be collecting helpful usage tips as I find them. 

##Make an Alias to Run the Notebook
Typing the command `jupyter notebook` quickly becomes tedious so this is a good candidate for an alias.
	
	alias nb="jupyter notebook"

##Using Shell Commands
In my opinion, the ability to use shell commands inside the notebook is the best part of using notebooks.  Using these tools allows you to record and reproduce all of the analysis steps exactly.  

You can run any shell command within the notebook by using the `!` prefix.

	In[1]: !ls
	Out[1]: file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt

The output of the command can be stored as a list

	In[2]: filenames = !ls
	In[3]: filenames
	Out[3]: ['file1.txt', 'file2.txt', 'file3.txt']

##Magics
```%load```  
This magic loads a Python file from a filepath or URL and replaces the contents of the cell with the contents of the file.  
```%matplotlib inline```  
This magic places matplotlib plots inline instead of opening a new window.  
```%%writefile```  
This magic writes the contents of a cell to a file.  
```%pprint```  
This magic toggles pretty print on/off  
```%reset```  
This magic resets the namespace by removing all names defined by the user, if called without arguments.  
```%timeit```  
This magic times the execution of a Python statement or expression. The CPU and clock times are printed.  
```%%html```  
Render the cell as a block of HTML  
```%%latex```  
Render the cell as a block of latex  


##Adding Line Numbers
One of the most annoying things about the Jupyter Notebook is the lack of line numbers. This makes it very difficult to track down lines mentioned in error messages.

Typing `CTRL-M L` toggles line numbers in the focus cell. 

To make line numbers default you must edit the `~/.ipython/profile_default/static/custom/custom.js` file by adding these lines:

	define([
	    'base/js/namespace',
	    'base/js/events'
	    ], 
	    function(IPython, events) {
	        events.on("app_initialized.NotebookApp", 
	            function () {
	                IPython.Cell.options_default.cm_config.lineNumbers = true;
	            }
	        );
	    }
	);	

From [stackoverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/20197471/how-to-display-line-numbers-in-ipython-notebook-code-cell-by-default)

##Keyboard Shortcuts
`Shift-Enter` Run current cell and move to the cell below  
`Ctrl-Enter` Run current cell and stay in that cell  
`Alt-Enter` Run the current cell then create and move to a new cell below.


